# covid19lag

Code here can be utilized to calculate COVID-19 case hospitalization ratios (CHR) and case fatality ratios (CFR), accounting for the effects of both age and lag intervals, as a rapid way of assessing disease severity during the emergent stages of a new COVID-19 variant of concern (VOC). Lag intervals are the time that it takes for the burden of COVID-19 associated hospital admissions and deaths to be seen after a spike in COVID-19 cases. If you simply divide the number of COVID-19 associated hospital admissions (or deaths) by the daily reported number of COVID-19 cases for a given day, you can imagine that this denominator does not reflect the true number of COVID-19 cases that gave rise to those outcomes, since it takes time for individuals to go to hospital and die from disease. 

Note that adapting this code directly would require a summary, de-identified COVID-19 surveillance dataset with daily counts of COVID-19 cases, hospital admissions, and deaths, stratified by age (or age category). Here, we utilized surveillance data from South Africa made available to us through request by NICD. 

CHRs and CFRs were calculated for a given day by dividing a) the number of COVID-19 attributable hospital admissions or deaths X days in the future, by b) the current 7-day average COVID-19 case count, where X represents a lag interval ranging from 1-25 days. CHRs and CFRs were calculated for each day and potential value of the lag interval, stratified by age and VOC. Finally, CHRs and CFRs were summarized across VOC-dominated waves by taking the mean of the log10-transformed rates for days between the t0 and t1 thresholds that defined each wave. 

The 'optimal' CHRs and CFRs, or those believed to be closest to the true estimate, are those for the lag interval which maximized the distance correlation between the leading and lagging indicator (for ex., 7-day average COVID-19 cases deaths). We calculated the distance correlation coefficient value for a range of case-hospitalization (1-20d) and case-death (1-25d) lag intervals deemed reasonable.

